Add Maintenance Pod Operating Guide (#78)
ansible-collections/cloud-content-handbook: TeamPractices/Maintenance_Pod_Operating_Guide.md

# Maintenance Pod Operating Guide

## Purpose

> The Maintenance Pod is a rotating, six-week pod responsible for maintaining the health, stability, and release readiness of the team's supported content while feature pods focus on strategic initiatives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Maintenance Pod is responsible for maintaining the health, stability, and release readiness of the team's supported content while feature pods focus on strategic initiatives.
Membership of the Maintenance Pod rotates every six weeks.
```

> The Maintenance Pod is accountable for operational excellence, timely customer support, and ensuring the team can continue delivering high-quality software.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Maintenance Pod is accountable for operational excellence, the maintenance and release processes, and ensuring the team can continue delivering high-quality software.
```

I think _timely customer support_ misrepresents the nature of what the team typically does - I have never done any direct support in this role.

## Objectives

- Resolve customer-reported defects.
- Address security and blocker issues.
- Deliver planned patch and collection releases.

> - Reduce technical debt where appropriate.

Reviewer: It might be nice to qualify "where appropriate" here a little more. Who determines that and what are some of the boundaries?

Reviewer: Maybe this could be expanded in the section about how the Pod Lead and the Team Lead interact?

- Triage and prioritize incoming maintenance work.

## Scope of Work

### Owns

- Bug fixes
- Security fixes
- Customer escalations
- Release activities
- Dependency upgrades
- CI/CD failures
- Test infrastructure issues
- Documentation fixes
- Backports
- Critical maintenance requests

### Does Not Own

- New feature development
- Large architectural changes
- Long-running RFEs (unless specifically reassigned)
- Product roadmap prioritization

## Roles

### Maintenance Pod Lead

The Maintenance Pod Lead is responsible for delivery coordination within the pod.

Responsibilities include:

- Lead planning and prioritization.
- Coordinate daily execution.
- Drive blocker resolution.
- Coordinate releases.
- Represent the pod during cross-pod discussions.
- Provide status updates to stakeholders.
- Partner closely with the Team Lead/Engineering Manager.

The Team Lead collaborates with the Maintenance Pod Lead to:

- Balance workload.
- Resolve priority conflicts.
- Escalate organizational risks.
- Ensure sustainable delivery.

## Scrum Ceremonies

### Sprint Planning

Attendees

- Maintenance Pod
- Scrum Master

> - Product Owner (or backlog owner)

Reviewer 2: Does our team have a Product Owner anymore under the new pod structure? I was under the impression we were somewhat self-sustaining/leading under this structure to enable Product Managers and related roles to focus on higher-priority tasks in the org at large.

> - Maintenance Pod Lead

Reviewer: This seems redundant with "Maintenance Pod" on line 68.

Outputs

> - Sprint goal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sprint goal(s)
```

- Prioritized maintenance backlog
- Capacity allocation
- Risks and dependencies

> ### Daily Standup

Reviewer 2: Is this expected to be a synchronous meeting for the team?

It may be prudent to provide further details about the format expectations for each meeting. If we're changing this from an asynchronous post in the team channel to a synchronous meeting, that will be important to clarify.

- Process improvements
- Handoff recommendations

## Recommended Recurring Meetings

| Meeting | Frequency | Owner |
|---|---|---|
| Daily Standup | Daily | Maintenance Pod |
| Backlog Refinement | Every 2 weeks | Maintenance Pod |
| Release Readiness | as needed | Pod Lead |
| Sprint Review | Weekly | Team |
| Retrospective | Every 2 weeks | Team |
| Maintenance Handoff | End of rotation | Outgoing & Incoming Pod Leads |

## Intake Process

1. New work is triaged.
2. Critical work is prioritized.
3. Product Owner confirms priority when needed.
4. Pod Lead assigns ownership.
5. Progress is tracked during standups.
6. Completed work is reviewed and released.

## End-of-Rotation Handoff

The outgoing Maintenance Pod should provide:

- Open work
- Outstanding blockers
- Release status
- Known risks
- Pending customer issues
- CI/CD concerns
- Operational notes

A short handoff meeting between outgoing and incoming pod members is recommended.

## Success Metrics

- Mean time to resolve defects
- Release predictability
- Customer escalation turnaround
- Backlog aging
- CI stability
- Security issue closure
- Percentage of planned maintenance completed

## Guiding Principles

> - Protect feature pod focus whenever possible.

Reviewer: This principle is interesting. I think it complements the opening purpose statement:

"while feature pods focus on strategic initiatives"

I know it's not intentional but this phrasing gives a connotation that the maintenance pod is like the backbench or of secondary importance, which should not be true. The objectives outlined here are mission critical work and just as important to customers as new features might be.

Sigh, trying to figure out a good suggestion to rephrase this and I'm falling short. I can revisit this review later but I wanted to leave a comment for now.

- Prioritize customer impact and system stability.
- Maintain transparency through regular communication.
- Keep operational knowledge documented.

> - Leave the platform healthier at the end of every rotation.

Reviewer: When we say "platform" here, what does this refer to specifically? Is it AAP?
